Ingest pipeline best practices (#1381)
elastic/docs-content: manage-data/ingest/transform-enrich/readable-maintainable-ingest-pipelines.md

:::

## Access fields

When creating ingest pipelines, there are are few options for accessing fields in conditional statements and scripts. All formats can be used to reference fields, so choose the one that makes your pipeline easier to read and maintain.

| Notation                       | Example                                               | Notes                                                                           |
| ------------------------------ | ----------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Dot notation                   | `ctx.event.action`                                    | Supported in conditionals and painless scripts.                                 |
| Square bracket notation        | `ctx['event']['action']`                              | Supported in conditionals and painless scripts.                                 |
| Mixed dot and bracket notation | `ctx.event['action']`                                 | Supported in conditionals and painless scripts.                                 |

> | Field API                      | `field('event.action', '')` or `$('event.action','')` | Supported in conditionals and painless scripts. Only available in versions 9.2+ |

Reviewer: Use an `applies_to` badge. This will be rendered on the page as `Planned` until the 9.2.0 release date. 

```suggestion
| Field API  {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.2.0`                    | `field('event.action', '')` or `$('event.action','')` | Supported in conditionals and painless scripts. |
```

| Field API                      | `field('event.action', '')` or `$('event.action','')` | Supported only in painless scripts.                                             |

Below are some general guidelines for choosing the right option in a situation.

> ### Field API

Reviewer: ````suggestion
### Field API

```{applies_to}
stack: ga 9.2.0
```
````

> Starting with version [9.2](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/131581) we have access to the field API that enables the usage of this API in conditionals (the `if` statement of your processor). Otherwise you can always use the field API in the script processor itself.

Reviewer: We don't mention future versions in prose in the docs to avoid confusion among customers before the version is released. 

I'm also not sure what exactly this paragraph is saying. Is this accurate? 

```suggestion
The field API can be used in conditionals (the `if` statement of your processor) in addition to being used in the script processor itself.
```

:::{note}
This is the preferred way to access fields.
:::

**Benefits**

> - Clean and easy to read
> - Handles null values automatically
> - Adds support for additional functions like `isEmpty()` to ease comparisions.
> - Handles dots as part of field name
> - Handles dots as dot walking for object notation
> - Handles special characters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Clean and easy to read.
- Handles null values automatically.
- Adds support for additional functions like `isEmpty()` to ease comparisons.
- Handles dots as part of field name.
- Handles dots as dot walking for object notation.
- Handles special characters.
```

> **Limitations**
> 
> - Only available starting in 9.2 for conditionals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Limitations**

- Not available in all versions for conditionals.
```

### Dot notation [dot-notation]

**Benefits**

- Clean and easy to read.

> - Supports null safety operations `?`. Read more in [Use null safe operators (`?.`)](#null-safe-operators).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Supports null safe operations `?`. Read more in [Use null safe operators (`?.`)](#null-safe-operators).
```

**Limitations**

- Does not support field names that contain a `.` or any special characters such as `@`.
  Use [Bracket notation](#bracket-notation) instead.

### Bracket notation [bracket-notation]

**Benefits**

- Supports special characters such as `@` in the field name.
  For example, if there's a field name called `has@!%&chars`, you would use `ctx['has@!%&chars']`.
- Supports field names that contain `.`.
  For example, if there's a field named `foo.bar`, if you used `ctx.foo.bar` it will try to access the field `bar` in the object `foo` in the object `ctx`. If you used `ctx['foo.bar']` it can access the field directly.

**Limitations**

- Slightly more verbose than dot notation.

> - No support for null safety operations `?`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- No support for null safe operations `?`.
```

:::

## Rename fields

The [rename processor](elasticsearch://reference/enrich-processor/rename-processor.md) renames a field. There are two flags:

- `ignore_missing`: Useful when you are not sure that the field you want to rename exists.
- `ignore_failure`: Helps with any failures encountered. For example, the rename processor can only rename to non-existing fields. If you already have the field `abc` and you want to rename `def` to `abc`, the operation will fail.

## Script processor

If no built-in processor can achieve your goal, you may need to use a [script processor](elasticsearch://reference/enrich-processor/script-processor.md) in your ingest pipeline. Be sure to write scripts that are clear, concise, and maintainable.

### Add new fields

All of the above discussed ways to [access fields](#access-fields) and retrieve their values is applicable within the script context. [Null handling](#null-safe-operators) is still an important aspect when accessing the fields.

:::{tip}
The fields API is the recommended way to add new fields.
:::

> **Fields API**
> We get the following field `cpu.usage` and we want to rename it to `system.cpu.total.norm.pct` which represents a scale from 0-1.0, where 1 is the equivalent of 100%.

Reviewer: Are we actually renaming a field or adding a new one? It looks like we're adding a new one, but let me know if I'm misinterpreting! 

```suggestion
For example, add a new `system.cpu.total.norm.pct` field based on the value of the `cpu.usage` field. The value of the existing `cpu.usage` field is a number on a scale of 0-100. The value of the new `system.cpu.total.norm.pct` field will be on a scale from 0-1.0 where 1 is the equivalent of 100 in the `cpu.usage` field.

**Option 1: Fields API (preferred)**
Create a new `system.cpu.total.norm.pct` field and set the value to the value of the `cpu.usage` field divided by `100.0`.
```

```json
POST _ingest/pipeline/_simulate
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "_source": {
        "cpu": {
          "usage": 90 <1>
        }
      }
    }
  ],
  "pipeline": {
    "processors": [
      {
        "script": {
          "source": """
            field('system.cpu.total.norm.pct').set($('cpu.usage',0.0)/100.0) <2>
          """
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

> 1. Our field expects 0-1 and not 0-100, we will have to divide by 100 to get the right representation.
> 2. The `field` API is exposed as `field(<field name>)`. The `set(<value>)` is responsible for setting the value. Inside we use the `$(<field name>, fallback)` to read the value out of the existing field. Lastly we divide by `100.0`. The `.0` is important, otherwise it will perform an integer only division and return just 0 instead of 0.9.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. This field expects 0-1 and not 0-100. When renaming the field, divide this value by 100 to get the correct value.
2. The `field` API is exposed as `field(<field name>)`. The `set(<value>)` is responsible for setting the value. Inside we use the `$(<field name>, fallback)` to read the value out of the existing field. Lastly we divide by `100.0`. The `.0` is important, otherwise it will perform an integer only division and return just 0 instead of 0.9.
```

> **No fields API**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Option 2: Without the fields API**
```

> Without the field API this can also be achieved. However there is much more code involved, as we have to ensure that we can walk the full path of `system.cpu.total.norm.pct`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Without the field API, there is much more code involved to ensure that you can walk the full path of `system.cpu.total.norm.pct`.
```

```json
{
  "script": {
    "source": "
      if(ctx.system == null){ <1>
        ctx.system = new HashMap(); <2>
      }
      if(ctx.system.cpu == null){
        ctx.system.cpu = [:]; <3>
      }
      if(ctx.system.cpu.total == null){
        ctx.system.cpu.total = [:];
      }
      if(ctx.system.cpu.total.norm == null){
        ctx.system.cpu.total.norm = [:];
      }
      ctx.system.cpu.total.norm.pct = $('cpu.usage', 0.0)/100.0; <4>
      "
  }
}
```

> 1. We need to check whether the objects are null or not and then create them.
> 2. We create a new HashMap to store all the objects in it.
> 3. Instead of writing `new HashMap()` we can use the shortcut `[:]`.
> 4. We perform the same calculation as above and set the value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Check whether the objects are null or not and then create them.
2. Create a new `HashMap` to store all the objects in it.
3. Instead of writing `new HashMap()`, use the shortcut `[:]`.
4. Perform the same calculation as above and set the value.
```

### Accessing values in an array

When you need to reference a specific element in an array using Mustache templates, you can use dot notation with the zero-based index. For example, to access the first value in the `tags` array, use `.0` after the array field name.

#### ![ ](../../images/icon-check.svg) **Do**: Use array index notation in Mustache templates

```json
POST _ingest/pipeline/_simulate
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "_source": {
        "host": {
          "hostname": "abc"
        },
        "tags": [
          "cool-host"
        ]
      }
    }
  ],
  "pipeline": {
    "processors": [
      {
        "set": {
          "field": "host.alias",
          "value": "{{tags.0}}"
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

In this example, `{{tags.0}}` retrieves the first element of the `tags` array (`"cool-host"`) and assigns it to the `host.alias` field. This approach is necessary when you want to extract a specific value from an array for use elsewhere in your document. Using the correct index ensures you get the intended value, and this pattern works for any array field in your source data.

### Transform into a JSON string

> Whenever you need to store the original `_source` within a field `event.original`, we can use mustache function `{{#toJson}}<field>{{/toJson}}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whenever you need to store the original `_source` within a field `event.original`, use mustache function `{{#toJson}}<field>{{/toJson}}`.
```
